#### General information about the File System Structure (FSS) to organize projects

##### Bioinformatics Laboratory

**Date:**	11 October 2020

**Update:** 16 October 2020, 18 November 2020

**File System Structure (FSS) - Version 2.0**

- For new projects the latest version of the FSS should be downloaded from GitHub
- The FSS will probably undergo further (minor) updates in structure, file content and/or file names. 
- Automatic scripts should take these updates into account, and should also automatically generate the standard files (CONTENT.md, LINK.txt, etc)

**Template File System Structure** 

A template of the directory structure, including predefined files, is available on GitHub. Using git bash you can clone a copy of this structure to your local computer

1. Start git bash
2. Move to the directory where you want to have the folder structure (cd Working Directory)
3. git clone https://github.com/EDS-Bioinformatics-Laboratory/Reproducibility/
4. Delete the .git directory. 

**FSS**

The FFS and content description should enable an (external) colleague to understand the content and relation between the different items.

For each research/support project the FSS is mandatory.

The following names should be used (do not add dashes, spaces, etc if they are not there already):

**YYYYMMDD_ProjectName**

* ProjectDocumentation
  * MyPresentations
  * ProjectDocumentation 
  * Literature 
  * Miscellaneous
* Data
  * Dataset_1
    * Raw
    * Meta
    * Processed
* Processing
  * Data
    * Dataset_1
      * Raw
      * Meta
      * Processed
  * yyyymmdd_DataAnalysis_ID
    * Data
      * Dataset_1
        * Raw
        * Meta
        * Processed
    * Documentation 
    * Settings
    * Code
    * Notebooks
    * Results
      * Tables
      * Figures
      * SummaryTables
* Manuscript
* Sharing

**Adding and removing levels**

Additional levels may be added to the FSS if needed to get a better organization of the project. Directories that are not used can be removed.

**Future embedding**

The FFS will, in due time, be embedded in a upper-level hierarchy to prevent having a single list with folders (projects). For example,

- Research
  - Single cell
  - Mathematical modelling
- Support
  - RNAseq
  - Metabolomics
  - Etc

**Detailed instructions: Directories**

* Pre-defined directories in the FSS can be removed if they are not used. 
* Project name should include year, month, day (YYYYMMDD_ProjectName). This allows sorting on date.
* **ProjectDocumentation** 

  * **MyPresentations**. Presentation given by you during a meeting (e.g., Progress meetings, EDS seminars, conferences)
  * **BackgroundDocumentation**. Any information of direct relevance for the project (e.g., documents received from collaborators).
  * **Literature**. Scientific literature from PubMed, BioRxiv, etc
    * (pdf) files should be in the format of Author-Year-Journal (or similar) to allow easy retrieval.
    * The project owner should also maintain an (annotated) publication list in e.g., EndNote or Mendeley. This can be used during manuscript writing. 
  * **Miscellaneous**. Any other relevant document (pdf's, powerpoints, etc).

* **Data** directories 

  * Data from collaborators, (public) databases, and/or generated by simulations
  * A data directory is found at 3 locations within the FSS. You can use the location(s) that is/are most convenient for your project. Unused data directories can be removed. 
  * Each data directory contains one or more sub-directories (e.g., **Dataset_1**) with Raw, Processed, and Meta data
    * **Raw**: this is data that comes from the measurement machine (e.g., fastq files, cel files)
    * **Processed**: initial processing to make the raw data suitable for further downstream analysis (e.g., cleaned, normalized).
    * **Meta**: description of the data. E.g., description of samples, measurement platform, experimental design, etc.

* **Processing** directory

  * The Processing directory contains one or more data analysis directories
  * The Data analyses directory name should include year, month, and day. 
    * _Provisional: In addition, it should contain a unique ID (within the FSS) such that it can be easily referenced from other documents (within or without the FSS). You are free to choose an ID_. 
    * For example YYYYMMDD_GeneSetEnrichment_ID23
  * **Code**. E.g., R, Matlab, Python files.
  * **Notebooks**. E.g., R notebooks, Jupyter notebooks
  * **Results**. Output from data analysis. Data analyses may result in
    * **Tables.** Tables directly resulting from data analysis. These, generally, comprise  Tables that are further analysed, processed, etc to result in, for example, (new Tables underlying) Figures, SummaryTables for publications or reporting, or Tables for Supplementary Information of publications.     
    * **Figures**. Figures from data analyses. The data underlying a figure should be stored as a data Table to allow, for example, to remake the figure or to make an alternative figure. Code for making the Figures should be self-contained (in the Code directory) and not be part of the data analysis code.
    * **SummaryTables**. SummaryTables for publications or reporting, or Tables for Supplementary Information of publications.
  * From the FSS, only the Processing directory or individual data analysis directories should be pushed to the corresponding GitHub repository <u>without</u> the sub-directories 'Results' and 'Data'. Thus, only the code, settings, code documentation, and notebooks.

* **Manuscript**. This directory should contain the (draft) manuscript written by the biolab or collaborators. this folder may duplicate figures, tables, and data from the data analyses folders. This directory should be self-contained

* **Sharing**. This directory may contain part of any other folder for the purpose of sharing with collaborators, reviewers, etc. This directory should be self-contained.

**Detailed instructions: Files**

* Pre-defined files in the FSS can be removed if they are not used. However, in any case the content of directories and files should be clear.
* <u>LabJournal.docx</u>. File in ProjectDocumentation with information that you maintain about relevant information about the project. E.g. notes from progress meetings, email exchanges, action points, etc. 
* <u>README.md</u>. Most directories contain this file with further information about the use of a specific directory. This file should be left unchanged.
* <u>CONTENT.md</u>. Most directories contain this file. This file can be used to clarify the content of the directory and/or specific files if necessary. If the content from a folder is clear from, e.g., the file names itself, then this file can be left empty or removed. The content of a directory/files should be clear for any other (external) colleague reviewing or using the FSS.
* <u>LINK.txt</u>. A directory may contain this file with links to locations of, for example, large data files. However, all linked information should be accessible to the BioLab group members.  _Note: at this moment this last requirement is not always possible. A solution for this is still needed._

* **Processing** directory
  * The Processing directory contains an example <u>github.txt</u> file with the basic commands to clone, pull, stage, commit, and push to sync Processing with the GitHub repo.
  * The Processing directory contains an example <u>.gitignore</u> template that can be adjusted and used for your project. This file allows to exclude directories/files from synchronization with GitHub. Additional .gitignore files may be placed in the individual data analysis sub-directories. 

**Miscellaneous**

- For the time being the FSS can be located at every (cloud) location but keep in mind:
  - the aim is to store everything at a single location when this becomes possible
- Everyone within our group should have or given access to any FSS and all its (remote) content
- When  necessary, it should be possible to copy a complete project FSS to a different location without that software stops to work, or information gets lost.
  - The FSS should be self-contained
  - Use relative paths in the code

**Markdown**

For editing markdown files outside GitHub you may want to consider Typora (www.typora.io; Windows, Mac) or Notepad++ (Windows)
